# OS Bonus Lab 1 - Multi-threaded Merge Sort
Shijie Chen

11612028 
## Implementation
In this lab, I implemented a multi-threading version of merge sort in C using the **_pthread_** library. The main idea is to split the whole array to multiple parts and create a new thread for each part. At last, I merged the result of different parts to complete the sort.

To simplify the code design, my implementation now only supports using 1, 2, 4, ..., $2^x$ ($x \in N^+$) threads. Suppose $N$ threads are used, the program first partition the input array to $N$ parts and create a thread running mergesort for each part. At last, result from the $N$ threads are merges using multiple threads, too.

Details of my design is explained in the comment of my code.
## Experiment Result
THe following table illustrates the result of the algorithm sorting 2e9 randomly generated numbers.

Experiment Environment:
* Arch Linux
* gcc 8.2.1
* CPU: AMD ryzen r5 2600 6C/12T@3.4GHz

| # threads | time cost (s)|
|:-:|:-:|
|1|51.55|
|2|26.99|
|4|15.17|
|8|11.01|
|16|9.10|
|32|9.20|
## Analysis
### Multi-threads v.s. Single-thread
* Multiple threads can significantly improve performance compared to the single thread version.
* Ideally, multi-threading should accelerate merge sort linearly.

    Suppose we are using $N$ threads, the total time $T$ should be:
  
    $$ T \propto \frac{1}{N}$$

### Margin Gain
We can observe the linear speed up approximately at 1, 2 and 4 threads. 

However, things slows down when there are more than 8 threads since the more threads you use, the longer it takes to merge the final results. 

In addition, if the number of threads is larger than the number of **logic cores** of the CPU, no noticeble further speed up should be expected. Performance may become worse when too many threads are created due to the cost of creating and destroying threads, as is shown in the experiment from 16 threads to 32 threads.

### Build Tips
To compile and run the code, you have to use gcc with `-lpthread` and `-lm` arguments.